README.md, before:

# Algebras and Lattices in Hawai’i

*honoring Ralph Freese, Bill Lampe, and JB Nation*

Three Legends of Universal Algebra and Lattice Theory, Ralph Freese, Bill Lampe, and JB Nation, worked most of their careers at the University of Hawai’i at Manoa. They all will be approximately 70 years old in May 2018, and a conference is being organized to celebrate their achievements.



--- 

**DEADLINE EXTENDED.** Following multiple requests, the submission deadline is now extended to February 20, 2018.

---

**Webpage.**

https://universalalgebra.github.io/ALH-2018/

**Venue.**
The conference will be hosted by University of Hawai’i at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, USA.
 
**Dates.**
May 22--24, 2018

---------------------------------------------------------

<!-- TOC depthFrom:1 depthTo:6 withLinks:1 updateOnSave:1 orderedList:0 -->

- [Algebras and Lattices in Hawai’i](#algebras-and-lattices-in-hawaii)
	- [Introduction](#introduction)
	- [Program](#program)
		- [Invited Speakers](#invited-speakers)
	- [Contributed Talks](#contributed-talks)
		- [Submission Information](#submission-information)
		- [Submission Deadline](#submission-deadline)
	- [Registration and Parking Information](#registration-and-parking-information)
		- [Parking on UH campus](#parking-on-uh-campus)
	- [Banquet](#banquet)
	- [Accommodations](#accommodations)
		- [On-campus](#on-campus)
		- [Off-campus](#off-campus)
			- [Two-Star Hotels](#two-star-hotels)
			- [Three-Star Hotels](#three-star-hotels)
			- [Four-Star Hotels](#four-star-hotels)
			- [Five-Star hotels](#five-star-hotels)
	- [Further Information](#further-information)
	- [Organizers](#organizers)
		- [Organizing Committee](#organizing-committee)
		- [Local Organizers](#local-organizers)
		- [Special Thanks To](#special-thanks-to)
	- [Contact](#contact)

<!-- /TOC -->


------------------------------------------------------------
## Introduction

This is a conference celebrating three mathematicians who spent their careers at University of Hawaii: Ralph Freese, Bill Lampe, and J.B.Nation.

---

## Program

Please see the [schedule of talks](./assets/Schedule.md)

### Invited Speakers
+ Brian Davey (La Trobe University)
+ Ralph Freese (University of Hawaii)
+ Peter Jipsen (Chapman University)
+ Keith Kearnes (University of Colorado, Boulder)
+ Bill Lampe (University of Hawaii)
+ Ralph McKenzie (Vanderbilt University)
+ George McNulty (University of South Carolina)
+ J.B. Nation (University of Hawaii)
+ Peter Palfy (Alfred Renyi Institute of Mathematics)
+ Walter Taylor (University of Colorado, Boulder)
+ Matthew Valeriote (McMaster University)
+ Ross Willard (University of Waterloo)


---

## Contributed Talks 

### Submission Information

We will referee short papers (up to 6 pages long, with possible extra 2 pages for references, tables, graphs, or pictures) and publish them ~~with the University of Hawaii publishing service~~ around the start of the conference, in May 2018. Long versions of the papers may be submitted later to a special issue of Algebra Universalis. (Of course, you may submit your paper to a different journal, if you wish.)

A short paper is not equivalent to an extended abstract of a proposed talk, and should contain new results which are proved, or new survey material. Papers may be submitted even if the author cannot attend the conference. 

If you plan to give a talk at the conference and prefer to submit an extended abstract (1-2 pages long) instead of a paper, then you need not submit via EasyChair; you may simply send it as an email attachment to the conference email address, [algebraslatticeshawaii2018@gmail.com](algebraslatticeshawaii2018@gmail.com). Extended abstracts will not be published in the conference proceedings, but will available on the conference web-site.

### Submission Deadline

**UPDATE:** Following the multiple requests, the submission deadline is extended to **February 20, 2018**.

Applications for contributed talks begin in November 2017 via EasyChair.  Please use the following link to submit your short paper or extended abstract:

**EasyChair paper submission link:** [https://easychair.org/conferences/?conf=alhawaii2018](https://easychair.org/conferences/?conf=alhawaii2018)
 
---

## Registration and Parking Information
Registration for the conference will be from 5pm to 7pm on Monday, May 21, outside of Keller Hall Room 319. 

The registration fee is 110 US Dollars, which includes the banquet at Willows on Wednesday, May 22. If you bring a spouse who wants to attend the banquet, the fee will be increased by 60 dollars to 170 total. 

**Please, pay the fees in cash when you register.**

Registration will continue on May 22, 8:30--9:30am near **Bilger Hall room 335**, where all the conference presentations will occur.

The conference will start at 9:30am on May 22, with about 25 talks currently scheduled over three days, May 22--24, between 9:30am and 5:30pm. There will be invited talks of 45-50 minutes, and contributed talks of 25 minutes.

### Parking on UH campus

If you plan to attend the conference, please send us a confirmation, and please **indication if you will need parking on campus** (this request is urgent, and we need to receive your confirmation before Monday).

If you rent a car during your travel to Hawaii, and you will need day or overnight parking on the campus for the days of the conference, you need to request it now.

We have been informed by the university parking office that we need to pay event parking early this week (week of May 7), otherwise, parking on the campus will be impossible for participants. 
Thus, we need to make a careful count of all of you who will need parking passes.

An all day/all night pass is 5 dollars per day on weekdays and 6 dollars per day on Saturdays (Sunday is free parking anywhere on campus).

Please, send us a note immediately if you will need the parking during the conference days May 22--24, and we will make an advance payment for the parking passes for you. If you order the passes, the cost will be added to your registration fee.

---

## Banquet
The banquet is on Wednesday, May 23, at 7:00 pm at [Willows](http://willowshawaii.com/) [http://willowshawaii.com/](http://willowshawaii.com/)




If you have any questions concerning your travel to Hawaii, your accommodation or request related to your planned presentation, please, do not hesitate to send us a message. The weather in Hawaii is usually very pleasant, and many of you heard of Kilauea eruption on the Big Island. We expect the flow of tourists to increase in the coming days. If you did not see lava before, maybe it is your big chance to see it when visiting Big Island after the conference.



Wishing you a good end of academic year and a smooth travel to the mid-point of Pacific,

-----

## Accommodations

### On-campus
Rooms on the University of Hawai’i campus in [Lincoln Hall](https://www.eastwestcenter.org/about-ewc/housing/housing-facilities/lincoln-hall) will be set aside for participants of the conference.
They will be available starting on December 4th on a first-come-first-served basis.  The nightly rate in Lincoln Hall runs between 56 and 80 USD, depending on the type of room requested.
Registered participants can contact the
[East-West Center Housing Office](https://www.eastwestcenter.org/about-ewc/housing/conference-housing)
at (808) 944-7805 and mention their association with the "Algebras and Lattices in Hawai’i" conference.
(Upon check-in, you will be required to prove that you have registered for the conference.) Requests may also be made by [email](mailto:housing@eastwestcenter.org).

### Off-campus
Here are some other options that are a bus ride away from campus.
We have not arranged a special conference rate at these hotels, but
most will offer the usual discounts (e.g., AAA, AARP) as well as 
local ("kama aina") discounts if presented with a Hawaii 
driver's license at check-in.

#### Two-Star Hotels
+ [Waikiki Grand Hotel](https://www.castleresorts.com/oahu/waikiki-grand-hotel/)  
  134 Kapahulu Ave, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: (808) 923-1814

#### Three-Star Hotels
+ [Maile Sky Court](http://www.mailesky.com/) (now Holiday Inn Express)  
  2058 Kuhio Ave, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: (808) 947-2828  
+ [Wyndham Vacation Resorts Royal Garden](http://www.vacationhawaii.com/wyndham-vacation-resorts-royal-garden)  
  440 Olohana St, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: (855) 421-4785  
+ [Hawaiian Monarch Hotel](http://www.hawaiianmonarchhotels.com/#/ms-1/1)  
  444 Niu St, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: (866) 293-4738  
+ [Queen Kapiolani](http://www.queenkapiolani.com/)   
  150 Kapahulu Ave, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: (808) 922-1941

#### Four-Star Hotels
+ [Moana Surfrider](http://www.moana-surfrider.com/)  
  2365 Kalakaua Avenue, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: 808-922-3111; Reservations: 888-627-8107  
+ [Outrigger Waikiki Beach Resort](http://www.outriggerwaikikihotel.com/#gref)     
  2335 Kalakaua Ave, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: (808) 923-0711

#### Five-Star hotels
+ [Halekulani](https://www.halekulani.com/)  
  2199 Kalia Rd, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: (808) 923-2311  
+ [The Kahala Hotel & Resort](https://www.kahalaresort.com/)    
  5000 Kahala Ave, Honolulu, HI 96816  
  Phone: (808) 739-8888  
+ [The Royal Hawaiian](https://www.royal-hawaiian.com/)  
  Address: 2259 Kalakaua Ave, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: (808) 923-7311  
  
-------------------------------------------------------------

## Further Information
Future announcements will describe plans for special publications and travel arrangements. If you are interested in participating, please send a short message to the contact email below.
 
-------------------------------------------------------------

## Organizers

### Organizing Committee
+ [Kira Adaricheva](mailto:Kira.Adaricheva@hofstra.edu) (Hofstra University, NY)   
+ [William DeMeo](mailto:williamdemeo@gmail.com) (University of Colorado, Boulder, CO)   
+ Jennifer Hyndman (Univ. Northern British Columbia, Canada)

### Local Organizers
+ [Tristan Holmes](mailto:tristanh@hawaii.edu) (University of Hawaii, Manoa, HI)  
+ [Joy Nishida](mailto:jnishida@hawaii.edu) (University of Hawaii, Manoa, HI)
 
### Special Thanks To
+ [Sue Hasegawa](mailto:sue@math.hawaii.edu) (University of Hawaii, Manoa, HI)  
+ [East-West Center Housing Office](https://www.eastwestcenter.org/about-ewc/housing/conference-housing)

---

## Contact
[AlgebrasLatticesHawaii2018@gmail.com](mailto:AlgebrasLatticesHawaii2018@gmail.com)

-------------------------------------------------------------
 
*Mahalo!*

Commit message:

adds note about parking at Lincoln Hall

README.md, after:

# Algebras and Lattices in Hawai’i

*honoring Ralph Freese, Bill Lampe, and JB Nation*

Three Legends of Universal Algebra and Lattice Theory, Ralph Freese, Bill Lampe, and JB Nation, worked most of their careers at the University of Hawai’i at Manoa. They all will be approximately 70 years old in May 2018, and a conference is being organized to celebrate their achievements.



--- 

**DEADLINE EXTENDED.** Following multiple requests, the submission deadline is now extended to February 20, 2018.

---

**Webpage.**

https://universalalgebra.github.io/ALH-2018/

**Venue.**
The conference will be hosted by University of Hawai’i at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, USA.
 
**Dates.**
May 22--24, 2018

---------------------------------------------------------

<!-- TOC depthFrom:1 depthTo:6 withLinks:1 updateOnSave:1 orderedList:0 -->

- [Algebras and Lattices in Hawai’i](#algebras-and-lattices-in-hawaii)
	- [Introduction](#introduction)
	- [Program](#program)
		- [Invited Speakers](#invited-speakers)
	- [Contributed Talks](#contributed-talks)
		- [Submission Information](#submission-information)
		- [Submission Deadline](#submission-deadline)
	- [Registration and Parking Information](#registration-and-parking-information)
		- [Parking on UH campus](#parking-on-uh-campus)
	- [Banquet](#banquet)
	- [Accommodations](#accommodations)
		- [On-campus](#on-campus)
		- [Off-campus](#off-campus)
			- [Two-Star Hotels](#two-star-hotels)
			- [Three-Star Hotels](#three-star-hotels)
			- [Four-Star Hotels](#four-star-hotels)
			- [Five-Star hotels](#five-star-hotels)
	- [Further Information](#further-information)
	- [Organizers](#organizers)
		- [Organizing Committee](#organizing-committee)
		- [Local Organizers](#local-organizers)
		- [Special Thanks To](#special-thanks-to)
	- [Contact](#contact)

<!-- /TOC -->


------------------------------------------------------------
## Introduction

This is a conference celebrating three mathematicians who spent their careers at University of Hawaii: Ralph Freese, Bill Lampe, and J.B.Nation.

---

## Program

Please see the [schedule of talks](./assets/Schedule.md)

### Invited Speakers
+ Brian Davey (La Trobe University)
+ Ralph Freese (University of Hawaii)
+ Peter Jipsen (Chapman University)
+ Keith Kearnes (University of Colorado, Boulder)
+ Bill Lampe (University of Hawaii)
+ Ralph McKenzie (Vanderbilt University)
+ George McNulty (University of South Carolina)
+ J.B. Nation (University of Hawaii)
+ Peter Palfy (Alfred Renyi Institute of Mathematics)
+ Walter Taylor (University of Colorado, Boulder)
+ Matthew Valeriote (McMaster University)
+ Ross Willard (University of Waterloo)


---

## Contributed Talks 

### Submission Information

We will referee short papers (up to 6 pages long, with possible extra 2 pages for references, tables, graphs, or pictures) and publish them ~~with the University of Hawaii publishing service~~ around the start of the conference, in May 2018. Long versions of the papers may be submitted later to a special issue of Algebra Universalis. (Of course, you may submit your paper to a different journal, if you wish.)

A short paper is not equivalent to an extended abstract of a proposed talk, and should contain new results which are proved, or new survey material. Papers may be submitted even if the author cannot attend the conference. 

If you plan to give a talk at the conference and prefer to submit an extended abstract (1-2 pages long) instead of a paper, then you need not submit via EasyChair; you may simply send it as an email attachment to the conference email address, [algebraslatticeshawaii2018@gmail.com](algebraslatticeshawaii2018@gmail.com). Extended abstracts will not be published in the conference proceedings, but will available on the conference web-site.

### Submission Deadline

**UPDATE:** Following the multiple requests, the submission deadline is extended to **February 20, 2018**.

Applications for contributed talks begin in November 2017 via EasyChair.  Please use the following link to submit your short paper or extended abstract:

**EasyChair paper submission link:** [https://easychair.org/conferences/?conf=alhawaii2018](https://easychair.org/conferences/?conf=alhawaii2018)
 
---

## Registration and Parking Information
Registration for the conference will be from 5pm to 7pm on Monday, May 21, outside of Keller Hall Room 319. 

The registration fee is 110 US Dollars, which includes the banquet at Willows on Wednesday, May 22. If you bring a spouse who wants to attend the banquet, the fee will be increased by 60 dollars to 170 total. 

**Please, pay the fees in cash when you register.**

Registration will continue on May 22, 8:30--9:30am near **Bilger Hall room 335**, where all the conference presentations will occur.

The conference will start at 9:30am on May 22, with about 25 talks currently scheduled over three days, May 22--24, between 9:30am and 5:30pm. There will be invited talks of 45-50 minutes, and contributed talks of 25 minutes.

### Parking on UH campus

**East-West Center Housing Parking.** If you will be staying at East-West Center Housing (e.g., Lincoln Hall), then your accommodatios are essentially just accross the street from the Math Department, and you can request a parking pass from the East-West Center.  In that case, you should not need the type of parking pass described in the next few paragraphs.

If you plan to attend the conference, please send us a confirmation, and please **indication if you will need parking on campus** (this request is urgent, and we need to receive your confirmation before Monday, May 7).

If you rent a car during your travel to Hawaii, and you will need day or overnight parking on the campus for the days of the conference, you need to request it now.

We have been informed by the university parking office that we need to pay event parking early this week (week of May 7), otherwise, parking on the campus will be impossible for participants. 
Thus, we need to make a careful count of all of you who will need parking passes.

An all day/all night pass is 5 dollars per day on weekdays and 6 dollars per day on Saturdays (Sunday is free parking anywhere on campus).

Please, send us a note immediately if you will need the parking during the conference days May 22--24, and we will make an advance payment for the parking passes for you. If you order the passes, the cost will be added to your registration fee.

---

## Banquet
The banquet is on Wednesday, May 23, at 7:00 pm at [Willows](http://willowshawaii.com/) [http://willowshawaii.com/](http://willowshawaii.com/)




If you have any questions concerning your travel to Hawaii, your accommodation or request related to your planned presentation, please, do not hesitate to send us a message. The weather in Hawaii is usually very pleasant, and many of you heard of Kilauea eruption on the Big Island. We expect the flow of tourists to increase in the coming days. If you did not see lava before, maybe it is your big chance to see it when visiting Big Island after the conference.



Wishing you a good end of academic year and a smooth travel to the mid-point of Pacific,

-----

## Accommodations

### On-campus
Rooms on the University of Hawai’i campus in [Lincoln Hall](https://www.eastwestcenter.org/about-ewc/housing/housing-facilities/lincoln-hall) will be set aside for participants of the conference.
They will be available starting on December 4th on a first-come-first-served basis.  The nightly rate in Lincoln Hall runs between 56 and 80 USD, depending on the type of room requested.
Registered participants can contact the
[East-West Center Housing Office](https://www.eastwestcenter.org/about-ewc/housing/conference-housing)
at (808) 944-7805 and mention their association with the "Algebras and Lattices in Hawai’i" conference.
(Upon check-in, you will be required to prove that you have registered for the conference.) Requests may also be made by [email](mailto:housing@eastwestcenter.org).

### Off-campus
Here are some other options that are a bus ride away from campus.
We have not arranged a special conference rate at these hotels, but
most will offer the usual discounts (e.g., AAA, AARP) as well as 
local ("kama aina") discounts if presented with a Hawaii 
driver's license at check-in.

#### Two-Star Hotels
+ [Waikiki Grand Hotel](https://www.castleresorts.com/oahu/waikiki-grand-hotel/)  
  134 Kapahulu Ave, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: (808) 923-1814

#### Three-Star Hotels
+ [Maile Sky Court](http://www.mailesky.com/) (now Holiday Inn Express)  
  2058 Kuhio Ave, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: (808) 947-2828  
+ [Wyndham Vacation Resorts Royal Garden](http://www.vacationhawaii.com/wyndham-vacation-resorts-royal-garden)  
  440 Olohana St, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: (855) 421-4785  
+ [Hawaiian Monarch Hotel](http://www.hawaiianmonarchhotels.com/#/ms-1/1)  
  444 Niu St, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: (866) 293-4738  
+ [Queen Kapiolani](http://www.queenkapiolani.com/)   
  150 Kapahulu Ave, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: (808) 922-1941

#### Four-Star Hotels
+ [Moana Surfrider](http://www.moana-surfrider.com/)  
  2365 Kalakaua Avenue, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: 808-922-3111; Reservations: 888-627-8107  
+ [Outrigger Waikiki Beach Resort](http://www.outriggerwaikikihotel.com/#gref)     
  2335 Kalakaua Ave, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: (808) 923-0711

#### Five-Star hotels
+ [Halekulani](https://www.halekulani.com/)  
  2199 Kalia Rd, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: (808) 923-2311  
+ [The Kahala Hotel & Resort](https://www.kahalaresort.com/)    
  5000 Kahala Ave, Honolulu, HI 96816  
  Phone: (808) 739-8888  
+ [The Royal Hawaiian](https://www.royal-hawaiian.com/)  
  Address: 2259 Kalakaua Ave, Honolulu, HI 96815  
  Phone: (808) 923-7311  
  
-------------------------------------------------------------

## Further Information
Future announcements will describe plans for special publications and travel arrangements. If you are interested in participating, please send a short message to the contact email below.
 
-------------------------------------------------------------

## Organizers

### Organizing Committee
+ [Kira Adaricheva](mailto:Kira.Adaricheva@hofstra.edu) (Hofstra University, NY)   
+ [William DeMeo](mailto:williamdemeo@gmail.com) (University of Colorado, Boulder, CO)   
+ Jennifer Hyndman (Univ. Northern British Columbia, Canada)

### Local Organizers
+ [Tristan Holmes](mailto:tristanh@hawaii.edu) (University of Hawaii, Manoa, HI)  
+ [Joy Nishida](mailto:jnishida@hawaii.edu) (University of Hawaii, Manoa, HI)
 
### Special Thanks To
+ [Sue Hasegawa](mailto:sue@math.hawaii.edu) (University of Hawaii, Manoa, HI)  
+ [East-West Center Housing Office](https://www.eastwestcenter.org/about-ewc/housing/conference-housing)

---

## Contact
[AlgebrasLatticesHawaii2018@gmail.com](mailto:AlgebrasLatticesHawaii2018@gmail.com)

-------------------------------------------------------------
 
*Mahalo!*
