## Abstracts of ALH Talks

- [Adaricheva, Kira](#adaricheva-kira)
- [Aglianó, P.](#aglian-p)
- [Aten, Charlotte](#aten-charlotte)
- [Bergman, Clifford](#bergman-clifford)
- [Clark, David M.](#clark-david-m)
- [Dang, V. V.](#dang-v-v)
- [Davey, Brian](#davey-brian)
- [Gjonbalaj, Gent](#gjonbalaj-gent)
- [Idziak, Paweł M.](#idziak-pawe-m)
- [Jipsen, Peter](#jipsen-peter)
- [Kearnes, Keith](#kearnes-keith)
- [Kehayopulu, Niovi](#kehayopulu-niovi)
- [Lampe, Bill](#lampe-bill)
- [Liu, Lei](#liu-lei)
- [McKenzie, Ralph](#mckenzie-ralph)
- [McNulty, George F.](#mcnulty-george-f)
- [Nation, J. B.](#nation-j-b)
- [Pálfy, Péter Pal](#plfy-pter-pal)
- [Seselja, Branimir](#seselja-branimir)
- [Silberger, Sylvia](#silberger-sylvia)
- [Valeriote, Matthew](#valeriote-matthew)
- [Taylor, Walter](#taylor-walter)
- [Willard, Ross](#willard-ross)

---

### Adaricheva, Kira

**Title.** Well known and little known Nation

**Speaker.** Kira Adaricheva

**Institution.** Department of Mathematics, Hofstra University, Hempstead NY

**Abstract.**
Starting from famous Malcev conference in Novosibirsk in 1989, the author describes the stride to approach the solution of Birkhoff-Malcev problem, where Ralph, JB and Bill all made their contribution. With JB Nation in particular, since R. Mckenzie's conference in 2002, it went into publishing uncountably many joint papers and finitely many chapters in the volume 2 of Lattice Theory: Special Topics and Applications (2016), edited by G.Grätzer and F. Wehrung. Surprisingly, the byproducts of this stride were as valuable as the the progress in Birkhoff-Malcev problem itself, bringing understanding to infinite convex geometries, and new applications in data science among others. 

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Aglianó, P.

**Title.** Splitting residuated (semi)lattices

**Speaker.** P. Aglianó

**Institution.** Via Roma 56 53100, Siena, Italy

**Abstract.**
The concept of splitting is of lattice-theoretic origin; if $$\mathbf{L}$$ is any lattice a pair $$(a,b) \in L^2$$ of elements of $$L$$ is a **splitting pair** if $$L$$ is equal to the disjoint union of the ideal generated by $$a$$ and the filter generated by $$b$$.  If $$\mathcal{V}$$ is any variety, an algebra $$\mathbf{A} \in \mathcal{V}$$ is **splitting in $$\mathcal{V}$$** if $$\mathbb{V}(\mathbf{A})$$ is the right member of a splitting pair in the lattice of subvarieties of $$\mathcal{V}$$. A more transparent definition is the following: $$\mathbf{A}$$ is splitting in $$\mathcal{V}$$ if there is a subvariety $$\mathcal{W}_{\mathbf{A}} \subseteq \mathcal{V}$$ (the {\bf conjugate variety of $$\mathbf{A}$$}) such that for any variety $$\mathcal{U} \subseteq \mathcal{V}$$ either $$\mathcal{U}\subseteq \mathcal{W}_{\mathbf{A}}$$ or $$\mathbf{A} \in \mathcal{U}$$.

Splitting lattices were introduced by P. Whitman (1943) in the early 40's; thirty years later R. McKenzie (1972) explored the concept with greater fortune. Note that if $$(a,b)$$ is a splitting pair then, by a standard lattice theoretic argument, $$b$$ must be completely meet prime and $$a$$ completely join prime. If we apply this to the splitting pair $$(\mathcal{W}_{\mathbf{A}},\mathbb{V}(\mathbf{A}))$$ then $$\mathcal{W}_{\mathbf{A}}$$ is axiomatized by a single equation and $$\mathbf{A}$$ is a finitely generated subdirectly irreducible algebra. If moreover $$\mathcal{V}$$ is generated by its finite algebras, then $$\mathbf{A}$$ must in fact be finite and if $$\mathcal{V}$$ is also congruence distributive then (by Jónsson Lemma) $$\mathbf{A}$$ is in fact unique.  We summarize all this in a theorem:

**Theorem 1.** [McKenzie (1972)] Let $$\mathcal{V}$$ be a congruence distributive variety that is generated by its finite algebras; then any splitting algebra $$\mathbf{A}$$ in $$\mathcal{V}$$ is finite and subdirectly irreducible. Moreover the conjugate variety $$\mathcal{W}_{\mathbf{A}}$$ is axiomatizable by a single equation in the language of $$\mathcal{W}$$.

Being generated by its finite algebras is  the *finite model property* for the equational theory of $$\mathcal{V}$$: if an equation fails in $$\mathcal{V}$$, then it fails in some finite algebra in $$\mathcal{V}$$. The equation whose existence is postulated by Theorem 1 is called the **splitting equation** of $$\mathbf{A}$$.
Note that the theorem does not say that if the hypotheses hold, then there is a splitting algebra in $$\mathcal{V}$$; nor its proof produces an effective way of determining the splitting equation of $$\mathbf{A}$$, in case it is splitting. Both the existence and the splitting equation require *ad hoc* arguments; and in 1972 McKenzie did exactly that, characterizing  the splitting algebras in the variety of all lattices and also giving an algorithm (still the only one available) for their splitting equations.

Almost in the same period of time in which R. McKenzie was working towards his results, in a different part of the world  V. Jankov was studying intermediate logics, which amounts to studying subvarieties of the variety $$\mathcal{H}\mathcal{A}$$ of Heyting algebras. In his investigations Jankov (1968) found a way to associate to any finite subdirectly irreducible Heyting algebra $$\mathbf{A}$$ a term $$J_{\mathbf{A}}$$ (called the *Jankov formula*) and was able to prove essentially that:
1. the largest variety of Heyting algebras not containing $$\mathbb{V}(\mathbf{A})$$ is axiomatized by $$J_{\mathbf{A}} \approx 1$$;
2. hence any finite subdirectly irreducible Heyting algebra is splitting in $$\mathcal{H}\mathcal{A}$$ with splitting equation $$J_{\mathbf{A}} \approx 1$$.

Subdirectly irreducible Heyting algebras are easily described: they are exactly all Heyting algebras having a unique maximal element below the top element $$1$$; a fancy way of saying that it that they can be represented as $$\mathbf{H} \oplus \mathbf 2$$, where $$\mathbf 2$$ is the two element Boolean algebra and $$\oplus$$ is the *ordinal sum*. So we can restate Jankov's result in this fashion:

**Theorem 2.** A finite Heyting algebra is splitting if and only if it is of the form $$\mathbf{H} \oplus \mathbf 2$$ for some Heyting algebra $$\mathbf{H}$$.

We will explain how this result can be generalized to several classes of residuated (semi)lattices.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Aten, Charlotte 

**Title.** Multiplayer Rock-Paper-Scissors

**Speaker.** Charlotte Aten

**Institution.** Department of Mathematics, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY

**Abstract.**
The game of Rock-Paper-Scissors (RPS) involves two players simultaneously choosing either rock, paper, or scissors. Informally, the rules of the game are that "rock beats scissors, paper beats rock, and scissors beats paper". That is, if one player selects rock and the other selects paper then the latter player wins, and so on. If two players choose the same item then the round is a tie.

It is folklore that the only "valid" RPS variants for two players use an odd number of items. Currently this is mentioned on the Wikipedia entry for Rock-Paper-Scissors without citation and with a reference to a collection of such games. In our language we have the following result. We give a proof of a more general statement.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Bergman, Clifford 

**Title.** Joins and Maltsev Products of Congruence Permutable Varieties

**Speaker.** Clifford Bergman

**Institution.** Department of Mathematics, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, 50011

**Abstract.** 
Let $$\mathcal A$$ and $$\mathcal B$$ be idempotent varieties and suppose that the variety $$\mathcal A \vee \mathcal B$$ is congruence permutable. Then the Maltsev product $$\mathcal A \circ \mathcal B$$ is also congruence permutable.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Clark, David M.

**Title.** Asymptotic Properties of Finite Groupoids

**Speaker.** David M. Clark

**Institution.** SUNY New Paltz, NY

**Abstract.**  Recent work has shown that randomizing algorithms drawn from the methods of evolutionary computation can efficiently find a term representing a given term operation on an idemprimal groupoid provided the groupoid has two other properties:  NSR and AC.  This work motivates a deeper study of these two properties which prove to be worthy of investigation quite apart from their application to these algorithms.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Dang, V. V.

**Title.** Minimal SH-approximation of semigroups

**Speaker.** V. V. Dang

**Institution.** Department of Applied Sciences,  Vietnam National University-HCMC, Hochiminhcity University of Technology, Saigon, Vietnam

**Abstract.** The problem of SH-approximation of a semigroup with respect to the predicate of a possible belonging of an element to a subsemigroup is considered. Several explicit conditions for SH-approximation with respect to this predicate are presented. We constructed a special semigroup acting the role of a minimal SH-approximation of semigroup for many predicates. This semigroup has neither identity nor additive identity. It contains an infinite number of idempotents, and the presence of each idempotent is mandatory. 
  
[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Davey, Brian

**Title.** A Tale of Three Papers:
a beautiful theorem, four open problems,
a surprising connection.
(My joint work with Bill, JB and Ralph.)

**Speaker.** Brian Davey

**Institution.** Department of Mathematics, Latrobe University, Australia

**Abstract.**
I have published one paper with each of Bill, JB and Ralph.

+ Davey, B. A.; Idziak, P. M.; Lampe, W. A.; McNulty, G. F.: Dualizability and graph algebras. Discrete Math. 214 (2000), 145--172.
+ Davey, B. A.; Nation, J. B.; McKenzie, R. N.; Palfy, P. P.: Braids and their monotone clones. Algebra Universalis 32 (1994), 153--176.
+ Clark, D. M.; Davey, B. A.; Freese, R. S.; Jackson, M.: Standard topological algebras: syntactic and principal congruences and profiniteness. Algebra Universalis 52 (2004), 343--376.

The talk will be based around the results in these papers and developments (mainly in the theory of natural dualities) related to them.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Gjonbalaj, Gent 

**Title.** Description of the closure operator for a convex geometry of convex dimension two

**Speaker.** Gent Gjonbalaj

**Institution.** Department of Mathematics, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY

**Abstract.**
Convex geometry is a closure space $$(G,\phi)$$ with the anti-exchange property. A classical result of Edelman and Jamison (1985) claims that every finite convex geometry is a join of several linear sub-geometries, and the smallest number of such sub-geometries necessary for representation is called a convex dimension. In our work we find necessary and sufficient conditions on a closure operator $$\phi$$ of convex geometry $$(G,\phi)$$ so that its convex dimension is 2, equivalently, they are represented by segments on a line. These conditions can be checked in polynomial time in two parameters: the size of the base set $$|G|$$ and the size of the implicational basis of $$(G,\phi)$$.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Idziak, Paweł M.

**Title.** Solving Equations -- kith and kin

**Speaker.** Paweł M. Idziak

**Institution.** Jagiellonian University, Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science,
  Department of Theoretical Computer

**Abstract.**
The talk is intended to present latest achievements in searching structural algebraic conditions 
a finite algebra $$A$$ has to satisfy in order to have a polynomial time algorithm that decides if an equation $$s(x_1,\dots, x_n) = t(x_1,\dots, x_n)$$, where $$s$$ and $$t$$ are polynomials over $$A$$, has a solution in $$A$$. 

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Jipsen, Peter

**Title.** Greatest Hits of the Hawaiian Legends of Universal Algebra and Lattice Theory

**Speaker.** Peter Jipsen

**Institution.** Chapman University

**Abstract.**
In this talk I will cover some of the highlights of the many deep and influential results that were discovered by Ralph Freese, Bill Lampe and JB Nation. Be prepared for a whirlwind tour of the classics spanning half a century of hits that reverberated around the globe and continue to delight and inspire mathematicians across space and time.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

###  Kearnes, Keith

**Title.** Is supernilpotence super nilpotence?

**Speaker.** Keith Kearnes

**Institution.** Department of Mathematics, University of Colorado, Boulder

**Abstract.**
An algebra is nilpotent of class at most 2 if it satisfies the commutator condition $$[1,[1,1]]=0$$, and it is supernilpotent of class at most 2 if it satisfies the higher commutator condition $$[1,1,1]=0$$. There are higher-class nilpotence conditions for both commutators. How are they related?  From the names, one expects that, for every $$k$$ there is some $$\ell$$ such that

class-$$k$$ supernilpotence = (class-$$\ell$$ nilpotence + $$\varepsilon$$)

holds. I will speak about this equation.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Kehayopulu, Niovi

**Title.** How we pass from ordered semigroups to ordered hypersemigroups

**Author.** Niovi Kehayopulu

**Institution.** University of Athens, Department of Mathematics, 15784 Panepistimiopolis, Greece

*Dedicated to Professor J. B. Nation*

**Abstract.** We have seen in [N. Kehayopulu, Lobachevskii J. Math. 39, no. 1
(2018), 121–128] the way we pass from semigroups to hypersemigroups. The aim
of the present paper is to show the way we pass from ordered semigroups to
ordered hypersemigroups.

An hypersemigroup is a nonempty set H with an "operation"
◦ : H × H → P ∗ (H) | (a, b) → a ◦ b on H called hyperoperation (as it maps to
each couple a, b of elements of S a nonempty subset a ◦ b of S) and an operation
∗ : P ∗ (H) × P ∗ (H) → P ∗ (H) | (A, B) → A ∗ B on P ∗ (H) (induced by the
operation of H) such that (1) A ∗ B = (a ◦ b) for every A, B ∈ P ∗ (H)
(a,b)∈ A×B and (2) {a} ∗ (b ◦ c) = (a ◦ b) ∗ {c} for every a, b, c ∈ H (P ∗ (H) denotes the set of nonempty subsets of H). If H is an hypersemigroup and “≤” an order
relation on H, we denote by (A] the subset of H defined by (A] := {t ∈ H | t ≤
a for some a ∈ A}; and by “≼” the relation on P ∗ (H) defined by

$$≼:= \{(A, B) | ∀ a ∈ A ∃ b ∈ B \text{ such that }(a, b) ∈≤ \}.$$

So, for A, B ∈ P ∗ (H), we write A ≼ B if for every a ∈ A there exists b ∈ B such
that a ≤ b. This is a reflexive and transitive relation on P ∗ (H), that is, a preorder
on P ∗ (H). An hypersemigroup (H, ◦) is called an ordered hypersemigroup if there
exists an order relation "≤" on H such that a ≤ b implies a ◦ c ≼ b ◦ c andc ◦ a ≼ c ◦ b for every c ∈ H; which means that if a ≤ b, then for every u ∈ a ◦ c
there exists v ∈ b ◦ c such that u ≤ v and for every u ∈ c ◦ a there exists
v ∈ c ◦ b such that u ≤ v. If (H, ◦, ≤) is an ordered hypersemigroup, a nonempty
subset A of H is called a left (resp. right) ideal of H if (1) H ∗ A ⊆ A (resp.
A ∗ H ⊆ A) and (2) if a ∈ A and H ∋ b ≤ a implies b ∈ A; it is called a
quasi-ideal of H if (1) (A ∗ H] ∩ (H ∗ A] ⊆ A and (2) if a ∈ A and H ∋ b ≤ a,
then b ∈ A. Recall that H ∗ A ⊆ A is equivalent to h ◦ a ⊆ A for every h ∈ H
and every a ∈ A. A nonempty subset A of H is called idempotent if (A ∗ A] = A.

We introduce the concept of regular ordered hypersemigroups, as follows: An
ordered hypersemigroup H is called regular if for every a ∈ H there exists x ∈ H
such that {a} ≼ (a ◦ x) ∗ {a}; which means that for every a ∈ H there exist
x, t ∈ H such that t ∈ (a ◦ x) ∗ {a} and a ≤ t. Some well known results on
semigroups or on ordered semigroups due to Iséki, Lajos and Szász, Calais and
Kehayopulu are examined in case of ordered hypersemigroups. Based on the
result by Calais [Demi-groupes quasi-inversifs, C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris 252 (1961),
2357–2359], for example, we prove that an ordered hypersemigroup H is regular
if and only if the right ideals and the left ideals of H are idempotent and for
every right ideal A and every left ideal B of H, the set (A ∗ B] is a quasi-ideal of
H. The corresponding results on hypersemigroups (without order), can be also
obtained as application of the results of the present paper and this is because
every hypersemigroup endowed with the equality relation “=” (that is, (x, y) ∈≤
⇔ x = y) is an ordered hypersemigroup. We tried to use sets instead of elements
in our investigation, to show the pointless character of the results (in the same
spirit with the abstract formulation of general topology –the so-called topology
without points– initiated by Koutský and Nöbeling); illustrative examples using
a table of multiplication (: the hyperoperation) and an order relation are given
at the end of the paper. The paper serves as an example to show the way we
pass from ordered semigroups to ordered hypersemigroups and its aim is to give
the right information concerning this structure.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Lampe, Bill

**Title.** Revisiting Grätzer-Schmidt

**Speaker.** Bill Lampe

**Abstract.** The theorems Ross Willard will talk/has talked about each require a special congruence representation. Our congruence representations will be built using variations on the techniques pioneered by Grätzer and Schmidt. So we now proceed to revisit those techniques and try to gain some further insight into how they work.

We will present their constructions in a slightly new way which makes many of the details easier and makes many of them disappear. Although we will present the construction in a slightly new way, the algebras at the end of either way are isomorphic.

We will also discuss some previously unnoticed features of their construction.


[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Liu, Lei 

**Title.** Automatic complexity of monotone Boolean functions

**Speaker.** Lei Liu

**Institution.** Department of Mathematics, University of Hawai'i, HI

**Abstract.**
Champarnaud and Pin (1989) found the maximum complexity, in terms of finite automata, of a Boolean function on n variables. We study the special case of monotone functions. It is inspired by an application to complexity of financial securities. Mathematically we relate it to a certain lattice homomorphism problem.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

###  McKenzie, Ralph

**Title.** Lattice Theory in Hawaii:  Bill, JB and Ralph

**Speaker.** Ralph McKenzie

**Institution.** Vanderbilt University, Nashville TN

**Abstract.** Theorems and People, Stories and Memories.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### McNulty, George F.

**Title.** Hawai'ian Excursions into Equational Logic

**Speaker.** George F. McNulty

**Institution.** Department of Mathematics, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC

**Abstract.** 
I will talk about the impact of the work of Bill Lampe, Ralph Freese, and JB Nation on equational logic.  While this talk will set some  well-known results in the context of equational logic and will pose some open problems, the talk will not explain how to lecture in barefeet, how to give your doctoral students the fatherly advice they need on the streets of Mexico City, where to go on your honeymoon, nor the relationship between fluid consumption and mathematical progress. But I will talk about natural undecidable equational theories, finite height (or depth, really), inherently nonfinitely based lattices, and zippers. 

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Nation, J. B.

**Title.** Extending partial projective planes

**Speaker.** J. B. Nation

**Insitution.** Department of Mathematics, University of Hawai'i, Honolulu

**Abstract.**
This note discusses a computational method for constructing finite projective planes.

There are a number of interesting problems concerning finite non-desarguean projective planes.
One would hope that these problems would admit an algebraic, or geometric, or combinatorial solution. But it may just be that the existence, or non-existence, of certain types of planes is an accident of nature. With that in mind, since 1999 the author has been trying various computer programs to construct non-desarguean projective planes. While all these attempts have failed, hope springs eternal, and this note describes a set of problems and some ideas for addressing them.

This note is based on a talk given to the Courant Institute geometry seminar in October 2017.
The author appreciates the hospitality and encouragement from the participants of the seminar.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---


### Pálfy, Péter Pal 

**Title.** The role of twisted wreath products in the finite congruence lattice problem

**Speaker.** Péter Pal Pálfy

**Institution.** Rényi Institute, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest

**Abstract.**
On the poster of the conference we see Bill, JB and Ralph looking at a blackboard showing a particular 7-element lattice. This is the smallest lattice that is not known to be representable as the congruence lattice of a finite algebra (William DeMeo's Thesis, UH, 2012).

Although I am not able to solve the representation problem for this lattice, I will show how to reduce the problem to representing finite lattices as intervals in subgroup lattices of finite groups of two particular types: (1) almost simple groups; (2) twisted wreath products with peculiar properties. This is based on works of Baddeley, Lucchini, Börner, Aschbacher, and Shareshian. Twisted wreath products were introduced by B. H. Neumann in 1963. I will indicate how naturally this group theoretic construction arises and what relevance it has for the finite congruence lattice representation problem.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Seselja, Branimir 

**Title.** $$\Omega$$-algebras

**Speaker.** Branimir Seselja

**Institution.** Faculty of Sciences, University of Novi Sad, Serbia

**Abstract.** Starting with $$\Omega$$-sets where $$\Omega$$ is a complete lattice, we introduce the notion of an $$\Omega$$-algebra.  This is a classical algebra equipped  with an $$\Omega$$-valued equality replacing the ordinary one. In these new structures identities hold as appropriate lattice-theoretic formulas.  Our investigation is related to weak congruences of the basic algebra to which a generalized equality is associated. Namely every $$\Omega$$-algebra uniquely determines a closure system in the lattice of weak congruences of the basic algebra. By this correspondence we formulate a representation theorem for $$\Omega$$-algebras.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Silberger, Sylvia

**Title.** Sums of finitely many distinct reciprocals

**Speaker.** Sylvia Silberger

**Institution.** Hofstra University, Hemstead, NY

**Abstract.** Let $$\mathcal F$$ denote the family of all finite nonempty $$S\subseteq{\mathbb N}:=\{1,2,\ldots\}$$, and let $$\mathcal F(X):=\mathcal F \cap \{S:S\subseteq X\}$$ when $$X\subseteq{\mathbb N}$$. 
In this talk we treat the function $$\sigma:{\cal F}\rightarrow{\mathbb Q}^+$$ given by $$\sigma:S\mapsto\sigma S :=\sum\{1/x:x\in S\}$$, and the function $$\delta:{\cal F}\rightarrow{\mathbb N}$$ 
defined by $$\sigma S = \nu S/\delta S$$ where the integers $$\nu S$$ and $$\delta S$$ are coprime. 

We then discuss the following results.

**Theorem 1.1.**   
For each $$r\in{\mathbb Q}^+$$, there exists an infinite pairwise disjoint subfamily $${\cal H}_r\subseteq{\cal F}$$ such that $$r=\sigma S$$ for all $$S\in{\cal H}_r$$. 

**Theorem 1.2.**  
Let $$X$$ be a pairwise coprime set of positive integers. Then $$\sigma\upharpoonright \mathcal F (X)$$ and $$\delta\upharpoonright \mathcal F (X)$$ are injective. Also, $$\sigma C\in{\mathbb N}$$ for 
$$C\in{\cal F}(X)$$ only if $$C=\{1\}$$.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Valeriote, Matthew

**Title.** UACalc and testing for Maltsev conditions

**Speaker.** Matthew Valeriote

**Institution.** Department of Mathematics, McMaster University, Canada

**Abstract.**
In the 1990's several researchers, including Ralph Freese, Emil Kiss, and the speaker, produced various versions of a software package that is now known as UACalc.  In addition to being a very useful research tool for investigating finite algebras (I can't recall the last time that I had to compute the labelled congruence lattice of a finite algebra by hand), it also raised several interesting questions about the computational complexity of testing for certain properties of finite algebras and the varieties that they generate.

I plan to talk about the role of the UH group in the development of computational tools for studying algebras and lattices and then will focus on a set of questions and results about the complexity of testing for certain Maltsev conditions that were in part motivated by using UACalc and that have helped to expand the scope of the calculator.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Taylor, Walter

**Title.** Some two-dimensional lattices that fail distributivity or fail modularity and some other laws

**Author.** Walter Taylor

**Institution.** Mathematics Department, University of Colorado, Boulder

**Abstract.**
For $$L$$ a finite simple lattice, we can examine the class of topological spaces that can support a lattice (with continuous operations) that admits $$L$$ as a 0,1-sublattice. We consider this problem for various modular $$L$$, such as  $$M_n$$ ($$n\geq 3$$) and possibly $$M_{p,q}$$. Also a brief look at the distributive case. So far our spaces are small finite geometric examples, very user-friendly.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)

---

### Willard, Ross

**Title.** Independence of multi-term commutators and centralizers

**Author.** Ross Willard

**Institution.** Department of Mathematics, University of Waterloo, Canada

**Abstract.**
In 1977, Bill Lampe co-discovered the "term condition" and used it to prove the existence of algebraic lattices which cannot be represented as the congruence lattice of an algebra with just one basic operation.  Lampe's key observation was that there exist algebraic lattices whose shape forces every representing algebra to satisfy the term condition.

In the 1980s, a relativized version of the term condition came to form the standard foundation for what we now call the "usual" commutator.  In modern language, Lampe's observation was that there exist algebraic lattices whose shape forces the commutator operation of any representing algebra to be constantly zero.  Hence the commutator is not independent of the congruence lattice on which it sits.

There exist "unusual" commutators, all of which coincide with the usual commutator in congruence modular varieties but outside of that context can be strictly bigger than the usual commutator.  Each of these commutators is defined by systems of implications involving two or more terms.  In 1997 Lampe, Keith Kearnes and I asked whether there might exist an algebraic lattice whose shape forces these larger commutators to be constantly zero.  Thus began a "disastrous" collaboration which is now, finally, reaching consummation.  It turns out that not only are these larger commutators independent of the congruence lattice (modulo a few obvious necessary conditions such as subadditivity), they are independent of each other (again modulo some obvious necessary restrictions).  Stronger still, the corresponding centralizer relations can be abstractly axiomatized, and modulo this axiomatization, they are essentially independent of the congruence lattice and each other.

In this lecture I will try to connect these results to greed, Blackstone growlers, and Bill's personal hygiene.

[Back to Top](#abstracts-of-alh-talks)
